Okay, so this is Jim Barrett interviewing Mike Williams in his lovely music room at
his home on the 26th of February 2018. Mike has signed the project consent form and this
interview is being recorded for Wonder Bros 25 project funded by HLF Cymru. Right Mike,
so when did you first come across Wonder Bros? That would be at the Holly Bush pub in
Opkinstone in about 1997 or 98 when I was going there for the Ponder Breeze motorcycle club and
discovered a group of musicians, interesting looking types, in the back in the back room
and got talking to Richard Evans who's a trumpet player and I came down with my trombone that
belonged to my grandfather that went through the Great War and they suggested I take it home,
put it in a glass case and play this brand new valve trombone that they got from a lottery grant
and I took up the valve trombone and continued. Lovely, so you've been playing before, what sort
of playing had you done before? Oh yeah, I played in a brass band, I played in school,
Midgley Morgan Youth Brass Band and then when I left I thought where's the nearest band?
Then it was Lady Unsubble, Lady Windsor Colliery Band where I played cornet and tenor horn for a
couple of years and visited many many interesting places such as Blackpool and Pontains Rest and
Supermae, brass band competitions. I then gave it up for about ten years and it was only after
buffing it to Richard that I decided to take it back up. And what did you think of Wonder Bros in
comparison to your brass bands? Totally wild really, it was a totally different situation,
the brass band spent most of the time drinking actually but within two weeks of joining Wonder
Brass I was on stage in Brecon Jazz standing next to very experienced trombonists, pretending I
knew what I was doing but it was great, yeah, I really enjoyed it. Are there any particular
gigs that sort of stand out in your memory? Oh, there were some amazing times, the trip to
Paris to support Pont Reprise in their match against Stade Francais, it was an amazing weekend
in the Wonder Bus and we actually drunk the bar dry after coming out of the match. Ponti didn't
win, I won't mention the score but we had a great time. Any other gigs that you remember? Well,
I mean the most amazing gigs I think that I enjoyed really were at Cork Jazz in 99,
where we all travelled over by road through Rosley and all the way down to Cork, put up a
hotel for the weekend and played five gigs, played a thousand seat room, we didn't have a
thousand people sitting in it actually but they were amazing gigs and the Metropole in the centre
of Cork City were some fantastic gigs and the other players, that weekend we had Roy A's in
the next world famous jazz musician in the room next to us which is an amazing weekend in Cork.
Fantastic. Yeah, and sort of, well, how is it, why did you sort of stop playing with Wonder
Brass? What was the reason? Family commitments really, my wife noticed that every weekend I was
off from this band of musicians and there wasn't any income which of course that's with you,
Wonder Brass, that's what also makes it so special really that it is totally out there.
But it was just, yeah, I was taking up too much time, I had a young family and I had a break and
never went back. So regret the day, regret the day. But have you been doing any other playing since?
Yeah, I kept, a couple of years later I bought myself a trumpet because I realised that the
trombone was a bit heavy to carry around and my dad actually, who's passed away now, bought me a
nice x-rental trumpet from a shop in Cardiff and I continued on with Ponderbury Jazz Club once a
month. I really enjoyed, I still do. And over the last four years we've got a band together
called The Unforgiven where I sing, I pushed forward as a vocalist and found out that I could
sing without making people run out the room so I was quite amazed by that and still play trumpet
as well with the band. Great. And do you think those are things that you might not have done if
you hadn't been in Wunder Bros? Oh I'm sure, yeah. I mean, I would probably have never realised
that I still had that love for music, you know, and had those opportunities. It was great. The gigs
were amazing gigs from South Wales Mining Club to, South Wales Caving Club, sorry, to many
nights in Cardiff at places that don't exist anymore such as the Baltimore and the New Year's
parades out of Cardiff Castle were fantastic. A bit uncomfortable though, a bit freezing cold but
yeah, excellent times. Okay, so you've taken up singing since Wunder Bros? Yeah, I've come out
to the shower, I'm singing in the shower and I've gone in front of a microphone here and it's working
okay at the present. Yeah, any other instruments you've taken up? Yeah, I have actually, I can
learn to play the guitar, I can strum. I've been playing about three or four years and I've
got two nice examples, an electric acoustic and what I call a Chuck Berry guitar with F holes and
I do play a few numbers on stage which is, I think it's very interesting because you can also sing
at the same time. Okay, so presumably you hadn't done any improvisation before you joined Wunder Bros?
No, that's true, that's true, yeah. In the brass band it's quite regimented, you play the dots
and that's it, and that's it really. Even tunes that are jazz tunes are the set melody so
yeah, I find that, you know, I'm still developing that. I think music is a lifelong
development really but yeah, Wunder Bros helped me with that. So would you say that it was Wunder
Bros that got you into playing music sort of more by ear, less off the dots? Yeah, definitely,
definitely. I mean most of the time we didn't use sheet music in Wunder Bros. I can still
remember, still play the tunes by ear that we played in Wunder Bros because they're in my memory.
So it's definitely made a change, added something to your musical abilities and
taken you somewhere that you might not have gone. Even all that, what sort of grade did you get on
the, up to on the corner before you? I think I did great, I remember doing great up to grade four
right when I was a teenager. Okay. That was as far as it went then. So it's sort of taken you
beyond your sort of, as it were, your academic musical career. Yeah, I don't know what grade
I'd be judged to be now. I don't know. I wouldn't say I was a great trumpet player.
You know, I've been seeing some Wunder Bros gigs in the last couple of years at the Globe and
Cardiff, it was a fantastic one, and there's some trumpet solos played there that surpassed my
my achievements. But yeah, it's definitely, definitely advanced my playing.
Would you want to get involved with Wunder Bros again, perhaps as part of this project?
I have thought about it, yeah. I definitely want to expand my playing because I'm just playing
a set list of about 20 tunes.
And I think, yeah, if I could fit it in time, obviously, I work
forward it five days a week. Yeah, I'd like to do some more with Wunder Bros.
Okay, well, we'll have to see what's possible. Okay. Okay, thanks, Mark.
Right. Thank you, Jim. Thank you very much.
That's amazing what you remember. It's that. Let's have you start asking any questions.
Cold as a...
So what's this?